Purpose
----------

These example scripts are an introduction to the SrMise library, and are
intended to expose new users and developers to the major use cases and options
anticipated for SrMise.

Generating interest in SrMise is another goal for these tutorials, and we hope
you will discover exciting ways to apply its capabilities to your scientific
goals. If you think SrMise may help you do so, please feel free to contact us
through the DiffPy website.

http://www.diffpy.org


Overview
----------

SrMise is an implementation of the `ParSCAPE algorithm
<https://dx.doi.org/10.1107/S2053273315005276>`_, which incorporates standard
chi-square fitting within an iterative clustering framework.  The algorithm
supposes that, in the absence of an atomic structure model, the model
complexity (informally, the number of extracted peaks) which can be
justifiably obtained from a PDF is primarily determined by the experimental
uncertainties.  The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), summarized in the
manual, is the information-theoretic tool used to balance model complexity
with goodness-of-fit.

Three primary use cases are envisioned for SrMise:

1) Peak fitting, where user-specified peaks are fit to the experimental data.
2) Peak extraction, where the number of peaks and their parameters are
   estimated solely from the experimental data.
3) Multimodel selection, where multiple sets of peaks are ranked in an
   AIC-driven analysis to determine the most plausible sets to guide
   additional investigation.

Productively running SrMise requires, in basic, the following elements:

1) An experimental PDF.  Note that peak extraction, though not peak fitting,
   requires that all peaks of interest be positive.  This rules out peak
   extraction using SrMise for neutron PDFs obtained from samples containing
   elements with both positive and negative scattering factors.
2) The experimental uncertainties.  In principle these should be reported with
   the data, but in practice experimental uncertainties are frequently not
   reported, or are unreliable due to details of the data reduction process.
   In these cases the user should specify an ad hoc value.  In peak extraction
   an ad hoc uncertainty necessarily results in ad hoc model complexity, or,
   more precisely, a reasonable model complexity if the provided uncertainty
   is presumed correct.  (Even when the uncertainties are known, specifying an
   ad hoc value can be a pragmatic tool for exploring alternate models,
   especially in conjunction with multimodeling analysis.)  Note that for both
   peak extraction and peak fitting the estimated uncertainties of peak
   parameters (i.e. location, width, intensity) are dependent on the
   experimental uncertainty
3) The PDF baseline.  For crystalline samples the baseline is linear and can
   be readily estimated.  For nanoparticles more effort is required as SrMise
   includes explicit support for only a few basic shapes, although the user
   can define a baseline using arbitrary polynomials or a list of arbitrary
   numerical values.
4) The range over which to extract or fit peaks.

The examples described below, though not exhaustive, go into detail about each
of these points.  They also cover other parameters for which good default
values can usually be estimated directly from the data.


Examples
----------

The following examples are contained in the *doc/examples/* directory of the
SrMise source distribution.

Run an example by typing in the command line ::

    python example.py

where *example.py* represents the example file.

Here is an overview of the examples. It is recommended that you work through
them in the order listed below.  Each example is copiously commented, and
indicates the command-line equivalent for the script where applicable.

Basic:

* Ag_singlepeak.py_
    Introductory script demonstrating how to load a PDF, automatically
    estimate a crystalline baseline, and extract an isolated peak.

* Ag_multiplepeaks.py_
    Introductory script demonstrating how to use a baseline from a saved
    SrMise file, extract multiple peaks, and obtain detailed information
    about the extracted peak parameters.

* TiO2_parameterdetail.py_
    Introductory script demonstrating basic use of all SrMise parameters. Of
    particular interest, it covers defining a crystalline baseline with
    explicit parameters, and assigning an ad hoc uncertainty when the
    experimental uncertainties are unreliable or unreported.

* TiO2_initialpeaks.py_
    Introductory script demonstrating how to estimate or explicitly define
    peaks prior to extraction.  This can be used to accomplish peak fitting
    or a mixture of peak fitting and peak extraction.

Advanced:

The examples here introduce multimodel selection using SrMise.  Note that the
API for multimodel selection is expected to change dramatically in a future
version of SrMise.

* C60_multimodelextraction.py_
    Demonstrates how to generate many models by varying the PDF uncertainty
    assumed during peak extraction, for later use in AIC-base multimodel
    selection.  Also shows how to use a baseline interpolated from a list
    of supplied values.

* C60_multimodelanalysis.py_
    Demonstrates a simple AIC-based multimodel analysis using the results of
    the previous script.

Sample PDF Information
------------------------

* Ag
    Crystalline silver X-ray PDF with qmax=30 angstrom^(-1). The PDF is Nyquist
    sampled, and the reported uncertainties are accurately determined from
    experiment.

* TiO2
    Crystalline titanium dioxide (rutile) X-ray PDF with qmax=26 angstrom^(-1).
    The PDF is finely sampled, and the reported uncertainties are unreliable
    due to strong correlations introduced in the data reduction process.

* C60
    Buckminsterfullerene X-ray PDF with qmax=21.3 angstrom^(-1). The PDF is
    finely sampled, and the reported uncertainties are unreliable due to
    strong correlations introduced in the data reduction process.  The
    included baseline is a fit to the observed interparticle contribution
    using an empirical model of thin spherical shells of constant density in a
    face-centered cubic lattice.
